go for it wonderful well good morning
and thank you very much for having me
here it's a real pleasure to be at sort
of a Les Mills HQ and obviously
hopefully you're enjoying your your gut
week so far early in the week Tuesday
but I obviously a lot of things to go
through through the week so it's a real
pleasure for me to be talking to you
about your gut where health starts this
morning and so for those who don't know
me my name's Ben Warren I'm a clinical
nutritionist so I have master's master's
degree in nutrition amongst other
qualifications
I'm Clinical Director the BPO health
clinic so the the the help BPO health
clinic we probably the largest natural
health clinic in New Zealand we do a lot
of the program I overseas called the VLP
program which is a program we do a lot
of intensive sort of pathology testing
looking at what's going on in people a
lot of stuff around the gut and things
like that and some of that stuff I'll
share with you today as we go through
this but it's not uncommon for us to do
at least 60 blood tests when people come
in so twelve to fourteen vials of blood
and and then we're looking at all the
major metabolic pathways within the body
so there's no no hiding if somebody has
something wrong with them we will find
it and and then we start using those
biomarkers to then track their health
and then we obviously look at
implementing diet and lifestyle factors
to reverse those parameters and improve
metabolic pathways for optimal
expression of health and so it's a real
fun fun area and for us a large part of
where we work is around the gut and so
for for me I never intended to be a
nutritionist I always intended to be a
golfer which is another strange choice
as I'm really from North London I was a
very good golfer out of out of North
London and got a scholarship to the
University of South Carolina on a golf
scholarship go play golf and
representing University and and studied
experimental psychologists my undergrad
degree met my wife who's a Kiwi so I'm
kind of like a souvenir from her early
that she brought me back to New Zealand
so very thankful for that
I had a very bad back injury even at
that stage coming out of university so I
tried to go pro and miss my tour car buy
a shop which was devastating and
proclaimed professional golf coach dice
of Pressburg golf coach for two or three
years and I was it was as a professional
golf coach that something happened that
changed my life and chain
the direction of my life that led me to
nutrition and I was on a course learning
about optimal joint mechanics and a lady
just looked at me on about the third or
fourth day of this course and said Ben I
hope you don't mind me saying this Beck
and so you've got a bad back and I was
like I yeah how do you know that she
went on to say I've got you can see it
twisted my pelvis scoliosis in my spine
I had one shoulder higher than the other
and when I swing the golf club my
transverse normal muscle wasn't firing
at all and I had no support for my back
and it was probably trashed now I knew
most of that I was working with no backs
physio I was had an osteopathic
chiropractor massage therapist and then
she went on to tell me that was probably
driven by a food intolerance and it was
probably dairy which shocked me and
being very scientific in my thinking I
was like well that's fine and how does
that work and she started explaining how
when you have plums in your digestive
system you start shutting down the
muscles that are on the same nerve
innervation from the spinal segments and
she just gets she was guessing it's
dairy because I didn't breathe very well
through my nose and my head had migrated
forward so I could breathe better
through my mouth so my posture back then
was pretty much saw that it's probably
pretty obvious and so very scientific in
my thinking so I'm like great surely
there must be a test I can take for that
and she's like well yeah you need to do
an IgG and IgA e ELISA test that goes to
America back then cost about $400 going
back about 15 years now and I'm like
great I want one of them please where
can I get them she goes I can organise
that so I got the tests done a number of
weeks later the tests came back that I
had a very severe food intolerance to
whey protein which is a protein that's
obviously found in dairy products
eliminated with whey protein and in
dairy products and my back didn't get
better straight away but what started
happening very quickly was for the first
time my life I flatten my domina wall
which my whole life basically look like
I drank a dozen beers a day my whole
life like one of my earliest memories
was having a tummy out here you know in
the bath next to my brother and looking
down and having a tummy out here and I
just always been bloated and and then my
asthma after a few weeks my asthma
mysteriously just disappeared and and
has never come back and I had bad asthma
to child and and as an adult and I was
just like this is incredible that what
you eat can have this kind of effect on
your health and how you think and feel
and and so I went and retrained through
one the top health
forms institutes in the world the Czech
Institute in California some of you
probably heard of pull check and then I
ended up doing a master's degree in
nutrition and at the moment I'm doing a
PhD through Canterbury on nutrition
genetics and mental health so that's a
real area of of interest for me so so
when we start looking at the gap we
start looking at you know this this
essentially this tube that's 20 to 30
feet long different sections within the
tube a lot of people say this that this
is the key to your health and I'd
certainly agree with that and there's a
couple of reasons why people say it's
the key to health the first reason is
this is where you break down the foods
into the base nutrients where you could
absorb them so you can rebuild your body
so if the system is not working very
well you're not going to be absorbing
nutrients very well and if you're not
absorbing nutrients very well you're not
going to be building the 75 trillion
cells that make up your body very well
the second reason why people say this is
the key to your health is because 80% of
your humoral immune system so it's 80%
of your immune system that protects you
from the outside world is located in
your digestive system so 80% a hundred
percent of the t-regulatory cells that
regulate your immune system are located
in the digestive system so this your
digestive system is the home to your
immune system and the reason being for
this is is our greatest surface area of
exposure to the outside world it's
actually not our skin it is actually our
intestine so if you look at your skin
the surface of your skins may be a
couple of square meters the surface area
of of your digestive system particularly
the small intestine is 20 to 30 square
meters so it's like 2 to 3 tennis courts
if you unfolded it so it's got huge
surface area and the reason it's got
these folds they're called villi and and
is to increase the surface area so you
can maximize the absorption of the
nutrients from the foods that you just
you've been eating and so it really it
really is the key to your digest to your
immune system so when ever you eat any
food your body and your body's immune
systems looking at those foods and if
your body has to decide whether those
foods are our virus or whether their
food and particularly protein so your
body will look at those proteins and go
is that is that protein food or is that
protein a virus or bacteria because
viruses are bacteria is a product
- so your body has to differentiate with
all the foods you reading whether it's
that food or should I attack it and so
what what we're seeing so let's jump
straight into a very common food a lot
of people like eating which we know is
causing a lot of immune responses and
we'll talk quite a bit about it as we go
through today is gluten so for 70% of
light-skinned people tested and it's
light-skinned people because the labs in
America and african-americans
genetically are much better suited to
eating gluten and light-skinned American
but 70% of light-skinned Americans when
they eat foods that contain gluten their
immune system is tagging gluten as an
invader essentially taken it as a virus
and then they're getting some kind of
immune reaction to that okay and so this
this then has far-reaching effects way
beyond the gut so what then starts
happening is something called intestinal
inflammation or leaky gut syndrome so
this is when the junctures in your
intestines they get loose and then
half-digested foods can get into the
bloodstream and cause an elevated immune
response so it starts off with this
intestinal inflammation which leads to
their nutrient malabsorption and then
you get elevated immune response you a
lot of people they have gastrointestinal
issues multiple food enhancers so they
may well get diarrhea acid reflux
they'll get bloating okay gas production
and then that can then lead on to up
regulation of the immune system and the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity so in the
clinic we found that eighty to ninety
percent of people who present with
autoimmunity that's coming from their
digestive system so I'll give you an
example of this we've just we just had a
fantastic result regarding an 11 year
old so we this 11 year old her name is
Genevieve she basically 18 months old
when she was walking she was walking in
and poked out when she was walking and
apparently something's wrong so ended up
at Starship and she got diagnosed with
reactive juvenile arthritis so an
autoimmune arthritis where her body's
immune system was attacking her joints
and so since that time she's had 11
specialists she's a banana starship
she's gone through times when she's had
to inject herself with cancer
medications like methotrexate on a
Friday but then she wouldn't be able to
eat
until Monday and and so when she came to
see us about 18 months ago we were
actually so confident that we could
reverse this condition in her that we
got a film crew down from Auckland to
film it before before we actually
started and it was quite interesting
because that but pretty much the whole
film crew were in tears
listening to this you know 10 year up
tenure up two and a half year old story
and so great news
she's we seem it's common in my mind
right now because just last week we
signed off on her and so she's been in
remission for six months so she's she's
been pain-free for six months no
medications for six months when we
interviewed her beforehand she just
wanted to be able to play sport that's
all she wanted she didn't want to be an
Olympian she just wanted to be able to
play netball alright and so now she can
she can do these things without pain how
did we do that we did that primarily
just by getting her gut working really
well so we found that she had major
immune responses especially to gluten
she had a pathogenic bacteria that were
living within her gut that was driving a
lot of these problems so we went in
corrected all of those rebuilt the
immune system and yeah at the moment
she's in fully remission so it's it's
exciting and so it has the ability to
help a lot of people and so a lot of
people have gut issues that they don't
even realize is a gut issue so when we
start looking at this leaky gut really
affects the whole body so you know
affects your Sinus in your mouth so from
if you have a dairy intolerance for a
lot of you your body will dump out the
antigens in your sinus tracts and give
you a blocked up nose and so you can
have to have a quick breathe in through
your nose
you should be how to breathe through
your nose if you haven't got a cold and
if you find that invariably you can't
breathe through your nose it's probably
a good indicator that there is not going
to be going well for you all right so it
can definitely then your body will start
tagging proteins that look similar in
your body and it can lead to rheumatoid
arthritis fibromyalgia these kind of
things has a big effect on your adrenal
glands which make your daytime hormone
and energy production so it leads to
fatigue over time obviously there's the
direct responses in the in the bow and
the colon constipation diarrhea
irritable bowel disease even Crohn's all
these aspects are major association with
inflammation within the digestive system
far-reaching effects as well
far-reaching effects into your thyroid
so conditions that
hashimoto's Graves disease so these are
autoimmune thyroid conditions everybody
we've reversed a lot of people with
under active thyroid xin every case of
under active thyroid we've ever seen
gluten has been a problem okay in all of
those cases and then affects your skin
because essentially your liver gets
overloaded and then the toxins will then
start spilling out through your skin so
these immune molecules will start coming
up through your skin and you'll see
things acne most Isaiah eczema and
psoriasis autoimmune and then you'll
also where my area of interest is very
much is is around been depression
anxiety ADHD in massive association with
mental disorders and so it has far so
literally what you eat directly affects
how you think and feel when you start
looking at the gut brain axis that that
brain axis is a three-way intersection
between your brain your gut digestive
system and the microbiome so the
bacteria that live within your digestive
system so I know you've just been all
been enjoying a bit of kombucha which is
fantastic so you've been supporting that
microbiome and we're going to we're
going to talk about that going going
forward alright so what we're going to
do we're going to roll into some like my
10 top tips to really get your gut
working as well as possible all right
and started building out around this so
when you start looking at your digestive
system what we're looking at here is
your autonomic nervous system it's got
two branches your parasympathetic and
sympathetic so your relaxation responses
your parasympathetic your stress
responses your sympathetic the thing
that I would like you to notice is that
this this vagus nerve the nerve
innovation it supplies which is on the
parasympathetic side it supplies the
flow of your saliva and so your ability
to break down those foods it controls
your peristalsis and secretion of
pancreatic enzymes and it controls that
and stimulates the release of bile to be
able to break down the fats so all of
your digestive system is on your kind of
parasympathetic or being relaxed side so
if you're if you're stressed while
you're eating you're not going to be
able to break down the foods you're
eating so now it's very difficult you
know to just relax so if I say to you
like right now okay go
head and relax I mean some of you look
pretty relaxed already actually but but
you know if I say you go it's very
difficult to learn if you less you train
through meditation and things like you
have to go instantly into that
relaxation response so one of the best
ways to go into this relaxation
responses through breathing because you
can control your breathing and your
breathing has a direct control on your
autonomic nervous system so I'm a huge
fan of diaphragmatic breathing all right
so I'm sure most of you know how to die
from it we breathe but for those you
don't you can just pop your hand on your
chip on your tummy one hand on your
chest you'll need to sit forward just
sit forward in bed good posture so you
can go ahead and do this and we're just
going to go ahead and have it
breathe into your tummy so as you
breathe in the tummy should go out so
you breathe in Tommy goes out and then
as you breathe out you got it tummy goes
in so we're going into this yoga type
breathing diaphragmatic breathing what
that does that brings your nervous
system down which then when you're
eating is going to very much help you
break down the foods so top tip number
one is going to be breathe into your
stomach when you're eating and so I had
one client who came to me for weight
loss she was a mom of three children and
she heard I was pretty good she's just
trying to lose like four or five kilos
and the diet was pretty good exercise
was very good and we just couldn't get
it or lose that last four or five kilos
and I was I was like well wonder what's
going on here and I said to you you are
you fairly relaxed because she seemed
very relaxed when she whenever I saw her
and she goes our she goes I'm most
relaxed when I come and see you because
that's my time out of the week and I'm
like okay and you know some of you
probably get that regards there you know
exercise that's their time out when they
come and see your personal trainer or do
a fitness class and so I said well
when's your most stressful time of day
and she goes are when I'm cooking dinner
you know I've got three children under
five I'm cooking dinner that's all
carnage in the background and and by the
time I sit down eat dinner I'm just so
stressed that I don't even know you're
hungry and so all we got her to do was
to breathe into a stomach when she was
stirring the pots that's all oh well
this week what we can do is get to
breathe into your stomach wait he's
doing the pots and that's what she did
and she lost two kilos that first week
didn't even change your diet okay
because she was stressed while she was
eating so she was shutting down all of
her nervous system so it really does
yeah puts an end to dashboard dining you
know like eating in the car and on the
run the next tip I really would like to
give you is chewing and and around
chewing how many times you think the
average number of times people Cheers
have a guess fives a great guess it's
four times okay so if you're not chewing
correctly you're not going to be able to
get the slider around the food you know
there's enzymes in the slide you're not
going to get around the food so it's
going to be much harder for your body to
break that food down and so we want we
want people to chew more ideally to to
liquid now I'll be honest with you out
of all the things we recommend that is
the hardest thing to do to chew too
liquid having said that it is incredible
gain for weight management and the
reason being is because the hormones
that control your sense of satiety
ghrelin and leptin it's work on a
feedback loop so if you really quickly
those hormones don't kick in and then
you then we tend to overeat oK we've all
got a good example of this you go to a
restaurant order a meal you eat the meal
regular pace you know average for twos
bye-bye you know and and then waiter
waitress comes up and goes would you
like some dessert you go yeah got a bit
of room and look so you know so you
order dessert but when a dessert comes
ten twelve fifteen minutes later you're
actually stuffed and then you go hard
but it looks so good pay for it so you
eat it anyway right and so so this it
really helps with weight management from
that aspect I have one one gentleman and
who who lost 20 kilos in ten weeks just
bite and I changed his chewing that's
all I did
changed his chewing and so it was funny
because I cook with him caught up with
him after four weeks and I'm like how
you going
he's like I'm doing he's doing great
he's losing bunch weight already and I'm
like he goes there's one problem is I
can only eat about 1/3 of the steak I
used to be able to eat and I'm like are
you why is that and he goes well my jaw
saw and I'm sick of chewing and I'm like
well that's perfect that's probably
about the amount you should be eating
okay so top tip number two is going to
be chewing to liquid and like I say
that's not easy to do but but the more
you can work on that
relaxing ensuring is going to really
help your digestive system so then the
food comes down into your stomach and so
your stomach is where your body makes
and releases hydrochloric acid it's a
very strong acid gets down to a pH of
1.5 to 2 very very strong to break apart
the proteins into these amino acids for
you
bodied to be able to use later so a lot
of people with stomach issues are
traditionally going to have things like
indigestion heartburn acid reflux these
kind of aspects and so 80% of people who
present with these kind of conditions
are often put on medications like lowsec
or metro sole or proton pump inhibitors
to to reduce the amount of acid that
they have so we know that 80% of people
who present with these conditions
actually haven't got strong enough
stomach acid okay so what that means is
this valve at the bottom this pyloric
valve will only open when the pH gets
very very strong 1.52 to know if so if
you've only got pH of 3 this valve
doesn't open and then the food sits in
the stomach for too long and can burble
up and give you acid reflux so there's a
couple of things you can do to see
whether this is you or not and so what
next time you're getting into these
symptoms of acid reflux what I'd like
you to do is literally have a tablespoon
of apple cider vinegar and it's either
going to make you worse or it's going to
make you better okay now if it makes you
better then then we know you haven't got
strong enough stomach acid and we need
to support the stomach acid and so you
know doing that regularly is going to
help and if it makes you worse well then
you just you know take some bicarbonate
sober so let's a alkalis the stomach
acid or over-the-counter pharmacy
medications that neutralize that acid
because you do actually know you already
have plenty of acid and if that's the
case you've got plenty of acid it's
often the case that this valves not
working correctly and that's often the
case of that valves not working very
well or correctly because of the food
intolerance in the small intestine okay
so then you have to sort of look further
down in the tube now if you've got a
problem anywhere in this tube you're
going to have problems elsewhere so I
had an example of this I had a
fourteen-year-old coming to my clinic
with really bad stomach ulcers she'd
just come back from Hamilton and the
gastric specialist and endoscope and she
had stomach ulcers she's a lowsec and so
came in to see me as a nutritional
consult and one of my first questions I
like to ask people always is how your
bowel movements you got lucky getting in
here by the way without me asking that
so how your bowel movements and the
mother was instantly like arch really
struggles in that department once every
7 days it's quite common and I'm like
okay well you know
I instantly started thinking the troops
fault you know like as soon as she eats
she gets acid reflux no matter what she
eats well the food can't go anywhere and
so it's full and so anyway we got a
bhau's working she had a food
intolerance that was driving that so we
eliminated that got abouts work and got
bowel movements daily and and that also
has just disappeared and I mean
everybody was just looking at the wrong
end of the tube they were looking at
this end of the tube and the problem is
at that end of the tube and so so if
you've got a problem anywhere in your
digestive system it can back up and then
affect your stomach as well all right
but a good way to support stomach
function is to start your day with lemon
and water okay so that squeeze half a
lemon in in a glass of water
ideally warm water they'll help you
absorb the water faster and then you can
just drink now and what that does it
just sets up your digestive system so
okay the days here foods going to be
coming get your digestive system up and
running other aspects around this is to
engage yourself with the food okay so
you've actually got to go who foods
looking good so it's coming you know
like you're going to get to engage your
nervous system with the food whereas if
you sort of like watching TV and
something over there your nervous system
is responding to that it's not
responding to this and we need our
nervous system to be responding to the
food in order to be able to to break it
down so then the food is coming down
into little into the small intestine and
this is really where the most of the
nutrients get broken down and when you
start looking at the small intestine
this is where the food intolerance is
really occur so how do you know if you
have a food intolerance or do you have
any symptoms following symptoms so along
lower abdominal bloating loose stools
diarrhea belch or burp after meals
headaches with one hour of eating
excessive appetite poor appetite feel
worse after eating crave certain foods
domina pains or cramps so if you have
two or more of those symptoms then
that's a good sign that you need to
improve your digestive system obviously
if you've got a if you've got a
diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome or
acid reflux then you know you actually
we actually know if you've got eczema so
if you have an autoimmune disease again
these are real big indicators if you've
got a medical diagnosis of these things
that there's something going on in your
digestive system so you've got to focus
on the effect of the food as much as
possible so you really got to start
listening to your body and seeing what
once you get from certain foods you know
when do you get bloated when are you
bloated are you bloated all the time
I was bloated for the time I was bloated
for 27 years and didn't know seriously I
was just because I I was just always
boated so if you're always bloated you
don't actually know any difference and
then so that was for me so it's very
difficult or if you'd asked me if I had
a day in hell so I go no I'm not bloated
I'm just always like this so so looking
at the effects of the food so when you
start looking at dealing with these food
intolerances you have really got to
avoid the foods that are inhibiting a
response in your nervous system so
gluten is going to be number one dairies
medical drugs so things like aspirin
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories like
voltaren they cause a lot of leaky gut
okay and can drive a lot of these
problems GM foods being isolated as
being problematic colorings preserved is
excess sugar because sugar then feeds
the unfriendly bacteria which then gives
us some it's called dysbiosis which is
too much unfriendly bacteria despite a
bacteria salicylates
a means and sulfites invariably they
those are more associated with liver
dysfunction okay so we don't actually
eliminate them you'll know if sulfite
sensitivity if those of you who really
can't handle some types of white wine
and it reason being is because they've
used sulfite as a preservative and then
so you have one glass then you have a
massive hangover that's a good indicator
that your livers not handling the
sulfites so you want to increase the
quality of the food item so if you're
having dairy you may want to try having
raw dairy because raw dairy straight
from the cow has the enzyme still intact
has the beneficial bacteria still intact
has much more be vitamin content so it's
much easier for your body to digest if
you're looking at bread you may want to
improve the quality of the bread and so
look looking at a whole grain spelt as
opposed to a traditional white see a
better and your body is going to be able
to tolerate that much better but for a
lot of people if you have a gluten
intolerance or dairy intolerance you've
got to actually eliminate the food for a
period of time so for me I eliminated
dairy for two years and then I
reintroduce dairy at much lower level
raw and I can tolerate dairy now I have
known for the last 12 12 years not
really
any problems with dairy okay but
certainly if I had a lot of poor quality
dairy and started having a lot of it
again probably my body would start
tagging that as protein as an invader
and my asthma would come back and so you
can control these things so like I
mentioned by a health and found that 70
percent of white skin people ever
intolerant to gluten so we want to
reduce your food intolerance by rotating
your foods as much as possible so
ideally over four days so it's a good
idea to try and do this at least with
your proteins particularly dairy and
eggs so don't eat eggs every day for
breakfast we clinically these days we
see a lot of people who have been on say
like the Paleo diet for two years
because they've got digestive issues but
the Paleo diet hasn't been helping them
and and what we then when we do testing
on on their food in times is they come
back as highly intolerant almonds and
the reason being they're eating almond
everything you know they're eating
almond bread that eating arm and muffins
laughing almonds for snacks and so
they've already got leaky guts the
immune systems then tagging almonds as
an invader and they're getting very
strong reactions to almonds so you know
it's just simple things like rotating
nut the nuts you're eating as your snack
throughout the day and I have walnuts
hazelnuts Brazil's
and so that you're rotating the
presentation of those proteins to your
bodies your body is not is not tagging
them as a as a verse and then emotional
responses to food can also set up these
food intolerances so childhood memories
and foods so so for me for many years I
couldn't eat cabbage and the reason
being is one of my first memories
childhood memories is a school dinners
in the UK as a five year old the dinner
lady who I still remember the name mrs.
Plummer tells you about it you know I
wasn't allowed to leave that room until
I finished my cabbage and and so you
know every time I looked at cabbage I
thought of mrs. Plummer and it set up a
stress response and and it you know
connect cabbage so it's not introduced
with personal growth called courses you
know open the box and you lift it and go
oh look there's mrs. Plummer and you
actually sort of see what's going on so
gluten really is the big problem for a
lot of people these days and so you
probably probably wondering why is
gluten in such a problem because you
know we have definitely eaten it you
know a lot of our grandparents ate a lot
of it
so I'll explain why but first of all
let's list look at is gluten safe for
non cex so in this study they were
looking at the safety of gluten so
there's a spectrum of intolerance to
gluten at one end of the spectrum you
have people who are celiac they have a
severe immune reaction to 20 parts per
million of gluten so then got a little
bit of bread or a little bit of gluten
containing food and have a severe immune
reaction so and but that's that's a very
small percentage of the population up
here there's a whole group of people in
the middle here who don't get that very
severe reaction but are still reacting
to gluten are still building immune
molecules to it and so in this study
they were looking at is gluten safe for
non celiac they looked at the production
of interleukin 15 which is the
inflammatory marker when cxn non celiac
individuals were basically challenged
with gluten so they gave gave gluten to
both CX and non CX and so they found
that gluten listed its harmful effect
through an interleukin 15 innate immune
response on all the individuals with and
without celiac so that basically shows
that even if you're not a CD AK
everybody gets some kind of low-level
immune response to eating gluten okay so
given that inflammation and chronic
inflammation is really the at the origin
of many of today's modern diseases if we
can reduce this low-grade inflammation
as much as possible it's going to be
good when you think I know inflammation
seems like a a word that's out there
inflammation you can really talk about
it as aches and pains so at some level
when you start getting increased
inflammation you will get increased
aches and pains all right so so we can
certainly see that that gluten really is
a problem for everybody and so I'd like
you to introduce you to Norman Borlaug
so Norman in the 1970s was nominated was
actually given the Nobel Prize for his
life's work and his life's work is he
developed a high yielding dwarf variety
of pest resistant wheat which we now all
currently eat but unfortunately what he
didn't know in this hybridization
process that it basically concentrated
the levels of lectins which are a
molecule that but the plants make to
protect themselves from the environment
and so in making this pest resistant
high yielding dwarf wheat the lectin
levels in that variety a ten to a
hundred times
traditional weed and so scientists are
now studying these lectins dietary
legends as disease-causing toxic
toxicants lectin based food poisoning
and new mechanism of protein toxicity so
weight lectins are now being heavily
investigated for the increase in
inflammation associated mon communica
lifestyle diseases so the point of this
being is the bread you're eating now is
nothing like the bread that your
grandmother used to eat okay because of
the dietary legends cools leaky gut and
then your body tags gluten as an invader
which is an indigestible protein okay
so we're beginning to understand the
sort of pathogenesis of why why this is
happening so when it comes to testing
for food intolerances there's raft and
other medical tests they really only
test them IgE immune response so that
they're testing a very strong immune
response very severe immune response we
really want to test i GA and IgG food
enhances so they're match a low level
immune response and that they're often
delayed so just just so you know in New
Zealand
Funt medically there's no funding for
testing for these IgG immune responses
are only really funded to test to see if
you're a celiac so certainly by all
means I highly recommend people go test
get tested for celiac because it's
becoming increasingly more common but it
doesn't necessarily mean to say that
you're okay with gluten so at least a
test is a test for antigens it is quite
expensive so these days it's about 500
dollars to do this blood test and it
only shows up if you've eaten the food
recently so there are some limitations
there's some limitations to this to this
testing applied kinesiology uses your
nervous system to respond to tests to
see how your body responds we don't use
this clinically we only use gold
standard medical tests in the clinic I'm
actually trained in a lot of
chiropractors for muscle test okay and a
friend of mine Dennis tuvi he was the
head pharmacist for Tauranga Hospital he
got there when he was 50 got diagnosed
with any chronic fatigue syndrome and he
didn't want to take any of the
medications because as a pharmacist he
knew the side effects of the medications
he didn't want to take any so he went
doctor hop in
he ended up finding a doctor who did
muscle testing he muscle tested him and
found he was deficient in born and zinc
gave him born and zinc and his Emmy went
into remission
okay he's now like 14 years ladies
written a book about it he then
basically didn't want to be a pharmacist
anymore and and he's a big advocate for
natural health and so applied
kinesiology can be very very useful all
right pulse you can even just take your
pulse and take measurements before and
after you've eaten the food and and what
you're going to be able to do is if
you're having a severe immune response
for that food your pulse will go up
you'll have a stress response to that
food obviously you know you've got to be
controlling as many variables as
possible so make sure you're just
sitting down still and you've been
sitting down for a little while but you
know with the advent of the Fitbit and
things like that's really easy just to
have you know just to check how's my
polls doing now generally a good example
this is like coffee a coffee is going to
be worth 10 beats per minute okay
because it raises your nervous system
response your cortisol so there's a good
little sort of ways that you can have a
look and see so top tip number four
obviously is avoid gluten gluten
containing foods as much as possible
there's plenty of gluten-free
alternatives I'm not basically saying go
grain free because you just plain your
buckwheat quinoa amaranth millet so
these sort of grains rice I still you
know they're whole grains they're
incredibly nutritious prepared correctly
and and so you can still be getting
eating these foods but we're really just
moving away from the gluten free foods
as well and when you start looking at
your overall in regards to your diet
won't be moving away from processed
foods obviously minimizing processed
sugar processed grains because they act
on your body faster than sugar so your
body is able to get the sugar out of
those grains faster than sugar and then
obviously moving away from gluten as
much as possible so then you can do some
food elimination challenges if you have
if you have concerns around you know
food intolerances so the first thing to
remember is you will be addicted and
intolerant to your favorite food so for
those of you who like love dairy and
you've just got to have a piece of
cheese before you go to bed that's a
good sign it's really looking very
guilty now
I'm not looking at anybody in particular
then that's a good sign or you know like
you just got to have a got to have some
crackers or got to have a piece of bread
with your dinner that's another good
sign you know you're intolerant to that
food it's easier easier on your immune
system to clump it up so it takes about
four to seven days for those cravings to
diminish you want to eliminate suspect
food for at least 21 days so you want to
go go gluten-free for 21 days and then
reintroduce the suspected food and
monitor the responses you know so
responses to look out for going to be
around bloating you're going to be
around tiredness fatigue racing heart
sleep issues then you don't sleep very
well
you can even monitor you know skiing
how's your skiing reactions and things
like that okay so there's a lot of bowel
movements it's going to be a good one to
monitor at the moment is that there's
some talk around that people shouldn't
eliminate gluten because when you then
do get gluten you're going to get an
elevated response and for me I'm not a
fan of that I believe if somebody's
gluten intolerant they should they
should eliminate it because you don't
want to get that low-grade inflamed
response all the time and when you do
then eat gluten that elevated response
is actually the true response of your
body to that to that antigen so it's
kind of like smoking if somebody smokes
every day your body habituates to the to
the toxins in cigarettes and you don't
coffee lungs up but if you stop smoking
for six months and then had a cigarette
your coffee lungs up because you're
seeing the true response of your body to
that exposure another option is that you
can just either juice fast or a plain
food diet
okay so just brown rice chicken and
broths and then for three days and then
slowly start introducing other foods so
you can start introducing the start with
vegetables and then three days later add
fruit and then three days later start
adding animal proteins like eggs and
then keep going three days later legumes
and you just keep introducing foods
until you get your symptoms back okay so
Ravana I had a I had a woofer which is a
willing worker an organic farm so down
in BP I live on a farm and soy down in
Hawke's Bay and so we did he was only
staying with us for two weeks so we
didn't have time to do the IgG IgA
testing which is what we'd usually do
and so we just put him on a basically we
put him on brown rice chicken and some
broths and
that's that that's all he ate and and we
got rid of his ask me to have a spare
his whole life is on steroids as a 21
year old so we were able to completely
get rid of his asthma but the trouble is
he couldn't really eat any other foods
without getting asthma which is then a
problem so then we had to rebuild his
system by that time he was already off
around the country but that was that was
all good so that can be very very useful
looking at these things all right
so supplements and foods to improve your
digestive function obviously the apple
cider vinegar in a tablespoon of warm
water the lemon juice half a lemon
squeeze in a cup of warm water aloe vera
aloe vera is a incredible healing got a
lot of incredible healing properties and
the aloe vera plant this chemicals in
there that make your cells replicate
very quickly so it's very beneficial for
your intestinal tract so taking aloe
vera juice just as a often we just give
it as a drink with some manuka honey and
it's very well tolerated but I always
like people if they've never had it
before is just to test a little bit on
their skin just make sure that they're
not getting an allergic reaction and
then having sort of five meals twice a
day very very beneficial for healing the
intestines l-glutamine which is the mino
acid that's the fuel that rebuilds the
the veal eye or the fingers in the small
intestine a heat tea spoon before bed
colostrum so colostrum has a lot of IgA
IgG immune factors so it's immune
intelligence from the mother and
mother's milk and that helps modulate
your immune response within the
digestive system so people with a lot of
gut issues across terms really
beneficial digestive enzymes to support
the digestive system to set up the pH as
well within the digestive system can be
really useful and then homemade chicken
broth and bone broths okay so they have
a lot of gelatin in their game very
beneficial to the gut and then also a
lot of like I mean our glycans
which are again used by fuel for healing
the intestines so huge fan top tip
number five is going to incorporate
broths as much as possible into your
into your into your day it's not
uncommon for us to sort of give people
between 500 milliliters and a liter of
broth a day so they have to have a liter
of broth a day and to help heal their
digestive system so
maybe later you're gonna get into some
broths moving into a large intestine
okay so large intestines number one way
we get toxins out of our body so I don't
know about you but I've got a five and
eight year old so who's our hot topic in
my household so we're going to talk
about the perfect poop should be well
shaped consistent in contour pass easily
light brown smell natural and float
without needing several attempts the
flash nobody likes that unflushable and
and then we look at poop Patrol dark and
sink that's a sign of dehydration or
longer transit times white and won't
flush is a sign amount excess fats
diarrhea or loose stools bodies attempt
to get rid of toxins at all costs foods
intolerance allergies stomach bugs
recognition of food particles you know
you shouldn't be able to go all there's
that blueberry muffin I just ate it
shouldn't be able to do that for two
reasons obviously cuz your medium
blueberry muffins but anyway it's our
different conversation
so it's an indication of insufficient
enzymes poor chewing and two shorter
transit time so the foods literally just
going through you so fast you can't
absorb it so these people often skinny
they often fatigued because they're not
absorbing the nutrition from the food or
eating often have a diagnosis of Crohn's
or ulcerative colitis pebbles pebbles
chronic constipation dehydration
indication eating gallbladders
dysfunctional alright so there's an
opportunity with this this bowel
movement you know on a daily level to
really check in and see what's going on
with your digestive system so you really
want to be using this as a as an
opportunity to see what's going on so
when you start looking at the
elimination through and bowel you really
want to check your transit time so
transit time is the time into timeout
okay so it's the time that food is
actually inside of you and it should be
12 to 24 hours and you can check this
with a corn on the cob and beetroots one
the best way so with beetroot you just
need a bunch beetroot start the clock
and then when you get red in the stools
stop the clock
corn on the cob that's the exception to
the chewing rule so just bite and
swallow and then you get to play spot
the corn
and so it should be 12 to 24 hours
ideally and so for a lot of people less
than this the foods not staying in your
long enough to get the adequate
nutrition from it but for a lot of
people you know people go oh my transit
times are ok but really when we look at
the transit times the transit times are
40 to 50 hours so even though they're
having a daily bell movement there's
another aspect to having you're not
being constipated and for me that's I
like people to pass 30 centimeters of
fecal matter a day a 30 centimeter poo I
don't mind if it's 1:30 to 15s or three
tens don't mind how you get there 6 5s
is no good again it's going through so
fast so a lot of people will say oh you
know Ben I have daily bowel movements
but yeah you know I'm not getting my 30
centimeters but like yeah I'm having
daily bowel movements and then we're
getting to do the transit time test and
the transit times will be 4050 hours so
the foods just staying in them way too
long unfriendly back to you then really
propagating heavily and so we're getting
we're getting a lot of problems so
longer than 24 hours and it's basically
poisoning you from the inside out so top
tip number 6 is really to know your
transit time you really want to just
know your transit time and so you know
know exactly what's going on and so
things to help with large in testing
obviously probiotic foods so probiotic
foods are probiotics are really defined
as a bacteria that has been shown to
have a health benefit and so part of
probiotic foods are foods that have
these beneficial bacteria that have a
health benefit so there's there's in
regards to dairy there's raw milk kefir
yogurt and yogurt containing cultures if
your dairy tolerantly all very good
vegetables sauerkraut understand
something a little bit coming to show
you how to make some fermented
vegetables later in a week which is
going to be fantastic pickled foods
kimchi natto tempeh regards to grains
you've got sourdough bread and then
probiotic drinks got kaffir kombucha tea
which you've all been you know been it's
sampling today it's fantastic now these
things are really powerful case you have
to be a little careful with kombucha so
some of you're going to be having some
fun over the next 24 hours on the frame
so yeah
it's all good so a friend of mine was
traveling with me on my seminars and
I'll often drink kombucha just as a you
know a nice drink at a CAF and so I
ordered a bottle of kombucha and I
didn't even think and and he was like oh
what's that I'm angry but I guess I'll
have one of them so he have one too and
so I just drank the bottle and didn't
think anything above it because I'm used
to it and he drank the bottle and he had
such a die off of his unfriendly
bacteria they basically put him in bed
for 24 hours so yeah so if you hit not
used to having a lot of fermented foods
just just go easy just just start off
slowly and build up it can be a bit of
fun it's very cleansing so it's all good
fermented cavasso of juvik so this is a
fermented beetroot drink from from
russia and then your cult you'll be
familiar with these sort of similar
drinks and then vinegar apple or apple
cider vinegar so you know many of you
probably be using apple cider vinegar on
your salads and will just buy the raw
one okay so then you're getting a
beneficial bacteria whenever you're
putting that on there so top tip number
seven is going to eat fermented foods
daily alright so you really so
traditional cultures show that they get
12 to 15 servings of probiotics every
day why because they didn't have
refrigerators so they were basically
having to ferment their foods and so
they're Ricola nating getting all these
different beneficial strains strains of
bacteria in the gut as they were going
along and then we also want to feed
these beneficial bacteria okay so we
want to because they need specific foods
and they need specific actually usually
most most often specific types of fibers
so garlic and onion are probably going
to be garlic onion leek are going to be
in your beet root Peas so the you know
these are all going to be very
beneficial again many fruits are very
very beneficial especially and then
legumes going to be chickpeas lentils
kidney beans baked beans so we've got to
be getting these foods into our diet to
feed the beneficial bacteria so it's not
only the probiotic food so for a lot of
people you know getting these foods is
going to really help with constipation
especially with children if any of you
have children are constipated or have
slow transit times you know getting
these foods in they're going to feed
those beneficial bacteria and that's
going to be really beneficial nuts
cashews pistachios and then obviously
some grains as well alright so there's
plenty of you know again coming back to
these Whole Foods
yeah yeah you certainly could if you've
got a digestive issue you can certainly
rotate them as much as possible often
with with food intolerance it's often
the proteins that are the problem and so
it's most most often with the with the
protein so you a lot of people you don't
have to necessarily rotate that the
garlic of the onion and things like that
it's more the proteins great question
okay supplements and foods for better
large intestine so prebiotic probiotic
foods so basically getting these into
the diet get large intestine working
better you know probiotics actually
taking a probiotic I think it been
mentioned talking about bio cult I'm a
huge fan of bio cult which is a fourteen
strain acid resistant probiotic facili
enhance for some people that's a
insoluble fiber that just adds bulk to
the stool and that can help a lot of
people but again everyone's different
for some people for psyllium husks will
block them up okay so you just you have
to see if that works for you slippery
elm is a is a herb that makes the
intestines increases the mucus secretion
of the intestine so it kind of makes
everything nice and slippery and it
helps it food move down and through
vitamin C to bowel tolerance can be very
very good even with magnesium the bowel
tolerance as well so magnesium and
vitamin C when you when you start
getting too much and you're not
absorbing it it'll attract water into
the into the intestine and then give you
a loose bowel movement so it's quite a
nice gentle way to get things moving
without having to take a laxative and
then trifler which is an Indian herb
constipation and digestive health very
very nice to just for people who you
know generally have a slower kind of
Constitution around their bowel
movements always tend to have longer
transit times just to keep things moving
around really really important so when
everything else doesn't work colonics
you sometimes have to reset reset the
bow and because there can be a lot of
impaction of fecal matter over years of
buildup and so then there's no surface
for the beneficial bacteria to really
thrive and live in and so with that that
just involves colonics and I'm flushing
out the bowel so you've got a nice clean
surface to work with from get
working really well for a lot of our
chronic patients we often don't see a
breakthrough in their health condition
until until they've done a series of
colonics and we refer them out for that
and and then we often see a breakthrough
in their condition and an improvement in
blood parameters so top tip number eight
is daily bowel movements or a must okay
so this thing it's really got to happen
and for many people there's only like
one time a day for this thing to happen
so you've got to schedule it to happen
you've actually got to make time in your
day because for many people if they've
missed this opportunity that's it's gone
got to wait till tomorrow now and so
instantly at that stage you at 48 hour
transit time which is a problem all
right so when you start troubleshooting
the digestive system there's something
called small intestine bacterial
overgrowth so this is where there's no
growth of bacteria literally in the
small intestine so that the bacteria
should primarily be in the ascending
colon here but what happens when the pH
gets out in the digestive system you'll
get a bacterial overgrowth in the small
intestine and so these people they'll
get bloated no matter what they what
they eat so particularly carbohydrates
whenever they any carbohydrates you know
like cumin or pumpkin pumpkin soup they
get bloated okay so this is a good sign
I've got small intestine back to your
overgrowth for probably a couple of you
having the kombucha is going to make you
more bloated and that that's potentially
because you have SIBO small intestinal
your overgrowth and so with this at
least the bloating whenever you eat
carbohydrates there's a urinary into can
test as a you know test that we can do
to find this and it basically requires
minimizing probiotics and probiotic
foods short-term using a bacterial kill
agent to knock down the bacteria in a
small intestine before you can then go
ahead and eat those foods again okay so
just just to be aware that there are
it's not just a case of everybody should
have loads and loads more probiotic
foods because for some people that will
make them worse okay
so then we start looking at yeasts and
things like that so you start looking at
gut pathogens so if you're doing all of
these things already and you still
experience a lot of gut issues then
potentially there it's going to be
pathogen in the gut so we do the most
parasitology testing of anybody in
Australasia and we find a lot of
pathogens and these things can be worms
round worms hook worms pin worms we see
neighbors we even see very disparate
bacteria with even isolated strains of
the bubonic plague in you have a lab
called us from America saying we had a
health emergency because we have your
senior isolated from one of our samples
so we find some pretty gnarly bacteria
in the intestines and these people is
often driving chronic fatigue and other
issues within more than the individuals
or spilling over and affecting other
systems so you know being aware of these
things are knocking them out everything
within the digestive system any problems
the blood from the intestines large
intestines all directly to the liver and
so you're after more then C liver
problems okay and so for liver problems
for men is invariably increased belly
fat you can see LDL cholesterol increase
for women it's going to be increased
storage of body fat on the hips and
menstrual menstrual imbalance I can
hormone hormonal imbalances you the
liver fails to clear the metabolites of
hormones okay so I wanted to give you a
top tip for exes for your liver function
which is exercise okay exercise helps
clean your liver as much as anything
like as any foods that you can give you
exercises absolutely incredible for
clearing your liver all right so I'm a
huge fan of exercise for that reason and
then the proteins from the liver will
spill over and start damaging your
kidneys and so I want to give you a tip
for your kidney function and that's to
drink water okay so I go with dr. Batman
high league for recommendations on water
he's one of the top doctors in the world
so if you if you're 60 kilos that's 2
liters a day 75 kilos 2 and a half
liters a day 90 kilos 3 liters a day and
then for every hour you're exercising
you're going to be having another liter
of water ideally with electrolytes in
okay and so it's you know the cellular
hydration is it's really really
important so when you start looking at
your digestive system it really is it
really for me is the key to your health
it's the foundation of rebuilding your
body and the nutrients from your diet
it's also the key to the immune system
and it's also the key to aches and pains
and
and inflammation so getting the
digestive system is working really well
so hopefully you know you've got some
good strategies with those 10 tips that
to get into and get into it so what
questions do you have any questions
you're in shock you're like oh what kind
of profs so yeah yeah how do you make
this boss so basically you could just
start off if you roasted a chicken just
take that carcass and chuck it in some
water with some carrots and some onions
and some garlic boil it up just start
off by boiling it up like overnight and
then then you've got a chicken stock and
so then you can either use that chicken
stock you can just just just take it in
a thermos to work and put some
Mediterranean herbs in it or you can put
it as a base for a soup and then and
then drink it that way and so there's a
couple of ways to get it in so that's
going to be one way to make it bone
broths a little bit more intensive so
invariably with bone broth you take get
the bones you buy specific sort of soup
bones that have been cut in half put
them in a big pot some apple cider
vinegar and you boil a bit usually boil
it up for about 48 hours stinks out the
whole house you have to have really
friendly flatmates to do that and and
then and then you can then use that and
just drink it there's there's very great
great place in in Auckland war
essentials royal essentials and they're
actually a pet food company but they do
do some fantastic drafts great value do
really good broth and so a be pure we we
have account accounts with them and so
like for me I usually order about 24 24
liters a month and then for me in the
afternoon I just
I'll just have like a big mug of chicken
stock every afternoon as it's just like
nice warm hug in the afternoon in winter
it's lovely and so yes so there's a few
different ways on our website VPO code
on NZ we've got how to make chicken how
to make drafts we've got how to make
sauerkraut fermented vegetables our
crafts really easy as well takes a
little bit of timers in you know you can
get a good jar like this of sauerkraut
for for literally a couple of dollars to
make so it was if you buy our jars like
at like $10 so it's very cost-effective
to make yeah good yeah mm-hmm yes it
will do as an allergy but with most
allergies you're going to know if you
have an allergy to a food because as
soon as you eat it you're going to get
an immune response so like with peanuts
or strawberries people get you know
welts and hives you so with an eye Dae
immune response it's a severe immune
response direct so you're generally
going to know with foods anyway so yeah
it's not testing for the IgA IgG S which
are those lower level immune responses
yeah I would have yeah I'll definitely
eliminate it yeah yeah definitely
eliminate for a little bit and after 21
days or so and and and and and just just
monitor how she goes does she also could
like catch up a lot of catching a lot of
bugs and things so we know her immune
systems under load and so yeah that's
yeah that's ovary because I think a
viral and so yeah yeah and so yeah so
it's good you can start you can start
putting all this stuff together and you
can see start seeing why people's immune
systems are are under load and and not
as strongest we want your immune system
to be like a heading dog in with the
Sheep so you want your immune system
iver eSchool DUP knows exactly when to
go in when to come back whereas a lot of
people's immune systems with
autoimmunity you'll see people's immune
systems more like a more like a couple
of Labradors in with the sheep so the
immune systems running around just
causing carnage but it's not actually
doing what you want it to do and so then
they have low-grade systemic
inflammation which then you know causes
a whole bunch of other issues depending
on their genetics so yeah
yeah yeah the main ones probably going
to be the real orange apricots dried
apricots so they're cured with sulfites
but what you can do invariably we've
found people with a sulfite sensitivity
are not converting the sulfites to
sulfates very well which is a liver
pathway and so we often find by having
giving them Epsom salt baths which is
magnesium sulfate that helps this
pathway in the liver so that they're
more tolerant I'm not not justifying
white wine consumption but it just makes
them more tolerant of then sulfites in
their diet and so yeah so you know
magnesium salt baths so just a couple of
cups of epsom salts in the bath a couple
of times a week and that'll just
increases your magnesium blood levels by
fourfold which is very nice helps the
muscles relax for a lot of people and
and then it just helps this specific
pathway regarding the liver and sulfate
I think I'm not sure not yeah I'm not
I'm not sure anyone know go go to ask
the audience on that one yeah I'm not
sure around the red wine I it's my
understanding that primarily they're
used in the white wine because the
antioxidant levels as a preservative but
yeah I'm not sure I'm not sure exactly
on the wine front very good
yeah it's pretty much the same thing
yeah for some people they don't for
whatever reason they don't necessarily
get along well with the lemons so
therefore solve it in a good way and
it's just really basically what you're
doing is just introducing a little bit
of acid into your stomach to get your
digestive system fired up and and that
really just helps them when you're
eating that your systems already already
started to get fired up as opposed to
just putting foods in and expected it to
come straight online that's a good point
that's good questions so you're probably
10 to 15 minutes beforehand is going to
be good the water we don't necessarily
want a lot of water in the in the
stomach when you're eating because you
will dilute the hydrochloric acid to a
degree and and so warm water you're
probably will know this just an
experience but warm water your body will
only absorb water out of the stomach
when it gets to body temperature and so
this is why if you go to gym you buy a
cold bottle of pump and drink it you can
then be on the treadmill and you can
hear literally hear it sloshing around
it's because it's got to get up to body
temperature before it can be absorbed so
warm body temperature water will be
absorbed faster and so I kind of like a
like a warm a warm water with lemon
juice just to get through the system a
little faster very good good good
well coffee is very Coffee is very
acidic anyway and so our systems are
very robust and really only if you've
got problems in the system do you then
have to start worrying about that so you
know our system can handle putting
multiple different proteins
carbohydrates fats in all together so
it's kind of it's pretty robust so I
would say that coffee is quite acidic so
I've never seen any research around it
or anything like that but I would
suspect that for most people that's not
going to be a major problem yeah yeah
yeah probably elite elite electrolytes
which literally they're just
electrolytes no sugar the reason that
they put you know so much sugar in with
electrolyte drinks is because the
glucose does actually help drive the
electrolytes into the entire site into
into absorption and so but having said
that you know most people don't need
extra sugar and so you elite le le tes
is a brand elite electrolytes I'm sure
you'll be able to get them around okay
it's Graham online all right well I
think that's my time I'm very well happy
to stay and answer any personal
questions you may have I just want to
again thank those meals for having me
here and thank scaring me down and
organizing all this and yeah just checks
out BPO K&Z if you need any help any
time don't hesitate to contact us okay
so thanks very much